Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host as always Ricardo Lob. And
today I'm joined by Dr Joshua May. He's Professor
of Philosophy and Psychology at the University of Alabama
at Birmingham. And today we're talking about his latest
book, Neuroethics Agency in the Age of Brain Science.
So Dr May welcome to the show. It's a
pleasure to everyone. Thanks for having me. So, in
the book, you go through actually several different uh
topics that I've explored on the show with other
people as well. But before we get into the
specific topics just to introduce what neuroethics is to
the audience. So, could you tell us a little
bit about this? I'm not sure if we should
call it a specific sub discipline or something like
that. But what is neuroethics? And what kinds of
questions does it deal with?
Sure. Yeah, neuroethics is a fairly new discipline. It's
really only about, let's see, 2025 years old is
around the turn of the century that it got
its own label and, and got pretty clearly defined.
But the idea is, it's sort of evolved out
of bioethics. It's kind of like bioethics for the
brain. But it's not just that it's also about
how neuroscience can tell us about some classic old
questions and ethics. So it's usually thought of as
well. We can think of neuroethics is partly just
how do we do neuroscience ethically. That's kind of
like bioethics for the brain. But then there's also
the idea that what can neuroscience tell us about
ethics. So there's this, this nice phrase, the neuroscience
of ethics and the ethics of neuroscience. And and
it includes both of those which, which is really
great. It means it's a very wide ranging field
and it's one that is, is both trying to
sort of ethically police neuroscience, but also to, to
learn from it. And that's one of the things
that's so exciting for me is that we get
to ask both of those kinds of questions in
neuroethics. So we can ask questions like when is
it ethical to manipulate people's brains? There's a lot
of new technologies coming out. Uh The are promising
to intervene on people's brains for, for medical purposes,
but also really just for the average consumer. Uh
Elon Musk has this, this company neuralink and there,
there are many others that are coming out with,
with a lot of um brain computer interfaces. Um
But then there's also questions like, well, what is
neuroscience telling us about how moral judgment works? Um
OR about about addiction or mental illness? Uh Things
like, like neurodiversity and, and we're, we're learning sort
of back and forth going from thinking about the
ethics and thinking about what the neuroscience tells us
about ethics. So I try to tackle at least
some of those questions in the book. I couldn't
cover them all. I mean, it's, it's already, I
think overly ambitious trying to cover a wide range
of topics. Um, A lot that I left out.
Um BUT, but I, I go from talking about
free will to addiction to brain technologies, brain interventions,
uh and the use of neuroscience in the courtroom
as well to, to potentially um you know, find
people guilty or innocent based on their brain activity.
Uh So something that you mentioned there, I, I
think that is probably very contentious. So for example,
when it comes to uh saying that neuroscience can
inform ethics, uh I mean, the ways that science
can inform a sort of a normative field, let's
say if that science can tell us what we
should do, what we ought to do, that is
the kinds of questions that ethics explores. I mean,
I would imagine that, but uh that would be
among moral philosophers and ethicists, a very contentious question,
right? Because that it is not at all a
straight, it doesn't have a at all a straightforward
answer to it. Right. Right.
Yeah. And there's this, this old is art gap
that, you know, David Hume famously introduced us to.
He said, and you can't just go from, here's
how things are, uh, to how, here's how things
ought to be. And that question I think is
still not exactly resolved, but most people who are
working in neuroethics just concede that that is a
gap and that we need to bridge it with
various principles. So we can't just go from, you
know, here's how the brain works to, you know,
here's how free will and more responsibility and moral
judgment, you know, ought to work. But we can
bridge that with various principles and we could say,
ok, well, if you know, this is how things
are working in the brain, um, maybe it can
tell us something about ethics. So I think that
you have to have some of those assumptions in
there and it's why we do need, um, ethics
involved when we're trying to draw those conclusions. We
can't just go from the science to the ethics
without some bridging kinds of principles.
Mhm. Yes. And I guess that by exploring some
of the topics we're going to talk about here
today, people will also get the notion of how
the two way street between science or neuroscience specifically
in this case and ethics work. So, uh, let's
talk a little bit about free will here. I
know that from a moral perspective, free will connects
with questions regarding moral responsibility, agency, stuff like that.
But I mean, in what ways do you think
that neuroscience as a scientific discipline can be informative
here. I mean, how would people tackle neuros uh
uh free will from a neuroscientific perspective? Because I
mean, I, I posed this question actually to um
last year to Kevin Mitchell who is a, a
neuroscientist himself. Uh I asked him, uh so why
did you get into a question that originally or
traditionally has been tackled by philosophers and not scientists?
And since you are a philosopher, I guess that
I want to ask you the same thing. But
from the other perspective, how can science help you,
let's say,
yeah, talk about uh controversial. That's one of the
the oldest most controversial questions in philosophy, right? Free
will. But, but I think it is, you're right,
it's a good way of thinking about it. There's
a two way street and for a long time,
philosophers have talked about free will without really thinking
much about the science. And they haven't really been
able to, to know much about what's going on
in the brain because, you know, neuroscience is, is
not that old of a discipline uh either. And
so you see some philosophers who aren't paying much
attention to the, to the science, but also some
scientists who maybe aren't paying much attention to the
philosophy. So I think the best work in this
area brings the two together and as philosophers, we
should be humble and, and pay attention to what's
going on in science. But the same goes in
reverse So I think for a long time, you
know, philosophers have been worried about free will by
looking at physics. They say, well, maybe uh physics
shows that the, the world is determined. And so
that means that all of our actions are determined
and that seems like it might threaten free will
if, you know, I have no real choice in
the matter of what I'm going to do. Maybe
it's all predetermined by the laws of physics and
in the past. But the, the more modern threat
that's coming from neuroscience is a little bit different.
The idea is that we're not just learning that
our actions are determined by physical forces, but that
they might be largely determined by unconscious forces. And
that's something that it does seem like we're getting
a bit of consensus out of neuroscience and cognitive
science more generally that a lot of our decisions
are driven by unconscious forces. Uh Freud was at
least roughly right about that. Um There are a
lot of unconscious factors now, they may not actually
deal with, you know, um repression and, and a
lot of uh problems with, with our parents and,
and the upbringing, but that's part of it and
part of it is just, you know, incidental factors
that, that influence us in the present moment that
we don't understand uh things like biases. Um OR
if you're just being particularly irritable, um there's something
a foul smell in the room or something that
could be influencing your decisions and you might not
realize that or think that it is. So that
is certainly a, it's a consensus now that a
lot of our decisions are influenced by unconscious forces
in the brain. Now, for many philosophers and scientists
that seems like it threatens free will because we
tend to think that our free choices come from
our conscious mind. It has to be that I
consciously choose, you know, to say certain words to
people or, or make certain decisions for that to
be free. And that does pose a major challenge.
But we have to do that both that work
from philosophy and science. You have to look at
science say, what is it really showing, you know,
how much of our decisions are influenced by unconscious
forces. But then also look at the philosophy and
say, well, does that really show that free will
doesn't exist? What do we mean by free will?
And I think that actually the science can help
us understand that as well. We can do studies
to try to figure out how do people understand
free will, you know, what does it mean? And
my own view is that I think once we
get all that settled and on the table that
we don't necessarily have a threat to free will,
we might need to revise our conception of free
will. Maybe it's a little different than we thought
it was, but it doesn't necessarily mean that we
have to reject it.
And I guess that there's also two different sets
of interesting questions here. One is whether free will
exists is a real thing, whatever it might be
or not. And the other is whether free will
exists or not, people have reasons for attributing more
or less free will to other people in different
circumstances. Like for example, when they want to blame
them or praise them, they usually attribute more freedom
to their actions. But uh if they think that,
I mean, they are, for example, the victims of
their circumstances or something like that, something bad happens
to them that they had no control over, perhaps
they are more, are less willing to attribute freedom
to their actions. Right? So I, I mean, those
are two different sets of, I would say interesting
and important questions here, right?
Yeah, that's a good distinction to draw partly because
philosophers for a long time only thought about either
free will exists or it doesn't. And they haven't
thought about it coming in degrees. And I think
that's a great development in the philosophy side. And
many philosophers today would say, well, no freedom. And
so responsibility and blame can come in degrees. And
I think that's right. And so we could even
see the science as suggesting that maybe we have
less freedom than we thought, but we don't completely
lack it. Now. I think that that's, that's right
that we're, we're learning that there's a lot that
influences our, our decisions that we weren't quite fully
aware of and that might actually mitigate blame. I
said, well, it's kind of like when you find
out that somebody, um, you know, stepped on your
toe accidentally, um, or, you know, you think that
somebody's been really not a very good friend lately
but you find out that, well, it's because they're
going through a divorce. Right. Or they've got some
ailing parents or they just haven't been sleeping because
they've got a newborn. And so you go, oh,
ok. And you said, well, I guess I'll blame
them a little bit less, but you don't treat
them like there's some machine that has no free
will. You just say, well, you know, I'm gonna
blame them less or hold them less accountable. And
I think that happens all the time through ordinary
life. So maybe it's not such a surprise if
we find out that the science is suggesting that,
that we, we need to do some more of
that. We need to say, ok, people have a
lot of different forces that are influencing them sometimes.
That means they're a little bit less responsible, but
we're still responsible in general and we're still the
kinds of creatures who can be held accountable for
our actions and make free choices, even if it's
true that we have less freedom than, than we
thought.
So, at a certain point there, when I asked
you, first about free will. You mentioned the fact
that we now know through science, neuroscience, psychology and
so on, uh that we have many different unconscious
mechanisms operating in our minds that of course influence,
at least to some extent our behavior, our decision
making and so on. Do you think that consciousness
is strictly necessary for free will to exist? Or
do you think that perhaps free will would still
be possible even in the absence of consciousness?
Hm. Yeah, that's a great question because my own
view is that consciousness isn't always necessary for freedom,
but it would be a little bit different if
you had no conscious choice in the matter at
all. And, and that would be, you know, this
idea of, of Pien very, very mouthful of a,
of a label there. But the idea that our
conscious choices are pi phenomena or, or they just
come along for the ride, they're just kind of
byproduct's if that really was the case that, that
our conscious decisions never really played a role in,
in our actions that I think could be potentially
a threat to free will. But I think what
the science is actually showing us is that those
conscious choices just play a bit less of a
role in our minds. And so to me, that
doesn't necessarily mean we, we lack free will. Uh
PARTLY because I think that we are these complex
agents, we have both conscious and unconscious forces. And
I think that we shouldn't just identify ourselves with
one or the other. We tend to want to
identify ourselves with the conscious part. So, you know,
I'm the one who consciously decides and all this
unconscious, you know, biases and things that I'm not
aware of. Not part of me. Uh I think
that's a mistake. I, I think it's true that
we tend to identify ourselves more with the conscious
parts, but this is all part of me. You
know, it's not part of anybody else. Uh You
know, the, the unconscious biases and thoughts I have
are, are, are not part of you. They're part
of me. And the analogy I like to draw
is with a corporation or really a large agency
where you have places like Apple has a CEO
and we often tend to identify the company with
the CEO. We said, well, you know, Apple kind
of is primarily driven by Tim Cook the CEO,
but of course, Apple is a much bigger entity
than that. It's not just the CEO, it's not
just the part that's playing that sort of executive
function role, as we often say in neuroscience, it's
part of it and it's important part, but it's
not the only part, there are a lot of
other features of Apple, like the, you know, level
level managers, all the workers and they all actually
direct the company and move it in different ways.
Now, Tim Cook might not be aware of a
lot of that activity. Um But it's part of
what Apple does, it's part of its agency. It's
part of how it acts and makes choices in
the world. And if you have no CEO whatsoever,
you might have a completely disorganized organization and feel
like there's not really any single entity here. So
maybe a CEO can help to kind of unify
things and provide some sort of direction, but it's
not the whole agency. So I think similarly, you
know, our conscious minds probably have to play some
role in unifying our, our, our otherwise uh disorganized
mental states, all the kinds of automatic thoughts and
desires that pop up all the time. But all
those things are part of who we are and
we, we can't distance ourselves too much from them.
And we, we need to maybe revise our conception
of our, of ourselves and our freedom to say
a lot of that is part of our ourselves
and our choices. Um EVEN if uh the conscious
parts must be involved as well.
Uh And I guess that also related to consciousness,
there's the fact that even if uh lots or
even most of what happens of or what goes
around in our minds is uh unconscious or plays
out at an unconscious level. I mean, at the
very least, uh I would say that we have
veto power over what comes out of those mechanisms
in terms of how they influence our behavior. Right.
I mean, a, at the very least before we
do something we can decide not to do it
or go through some other course of action.
Mm. Right. That might be enough for, for free
will. Yeah. The, the neuroscientist who is responsible for
a lot of this early work. Benjamin Labette actually
did think that we had free will just because
of that. He thought we had, well, he called
it free won't, uh, that, you know, we can
decide not to do things. You know, I'm not
so sure that that's enough though for, for free
will. I think that we, we really don't always
have that possibility to, to veto the actions. I
think that the science does suggest that we often
are kind of on autopilot a lot. There's actually,
uh, one philosopher who's been really pointing this out
a lot lately is, uh, Shandra Sri Pata. He's
at Michigan and he said we need to really
think about the default state of the human mind
as basically more automatic. It's kind of like it's,
it's like a car where if, you know, you
let off the, the brake, it just tends to
move forward. Um, EXCEPT apparently on Teslas is different,
but, you know, on, on most cars you let
off the brake, it just sort of goes out
of it. And I think that that's kind of
how the mind works as well. And cer certainly,
I think Sru Pada does as well. That there
are all these different kinds of thoughts that just
bubble up automatically, these different desires and impulses that,
that come on automatically. And we sometimes have the
ability to, to veto and control. But if a
lot of it's unconscious and automatic, then we might
not be aware of it. And so it's hard
to veto something that you're not aware of. So
I think if we said, uh we have free
will as long as we can veto every possible
automatic urge or thought that comes up, then I
think the science would, would suggest that we, we
don't necessarily have that. Um, BUT I do think
that we have some role for consciously influencing our
automatic thoughts and having that kind of cognitive control
sometimes to maybe direct those urges and thoughts or
to, to tamp them down and not let them
influence behavior. But a lot of times we're just
kind of on autopilots and, you know, I may
just automatically have some thoughts and, and let them
fly at a party. Um, AND some of them
might be, you know, a little bit insensitive, but
I can't say, well, I didn't consciously choose to,
to veto that insensitive remark. Um, OR I didn't
consciously choose to generate that insensitive remark. It just,
it just happened, it was automatic. Um I think
rightly, a lot of still hold each other accountable
for that. We said, well, you know, you, but
it was, you wasn't anybody else, uh who, who
said that insensitive remark and, you know, it's part
of, it represents part of who you are, uh
represents part of the kinds of automatic values and,
and um desires that you have going on in
your mind. And so I think that we still
have to, to some degree identify with those aspects
of, of uh our agency. It, it'd be kind
of like if, you know, Tim Cook says, you
know, I didn't realize, you know, there's all this
like spying going on with, you know, all of
our devices, you know, listening to you through your
iphones, I didn't realize it's just that the company,
all these managers and people, he still is going
to have to be, he and the company is
going to be held accountable for that. It's part
of what Apple did if they're, if they're listening
to us on our iphones, uh even if the
CEO wasn't fully aware of that, it kind of
happened on his watch, so to speak.
Uh WHEN it comes to this kind of topic,
one of the examples and uh since you talk
about being on auto autopilot mode there or something
like that, uh One of the examples that I
love the most, even though of course, compared to
other kinds of bigger decisions that we have to
make in our lives, it's relatively small. But uh
is the one of driving a car. I mean,
because uh for example, if I go to a
new city, uh, in my car and I don't
know the city, I don't know the streets, the
roads, I mean, I usually need to pay more
attention and so the attention really brings a con
anxiousness to the forefront because I really have to
pay lots of attention to all of what I'm
doing. But if I'm driving on the road I've
already driven on 500 times. I'm probably on autopilot.
Right. Because I really don't need to pay much
attention at all to what I'm doing. And, uh,
I mean, we, we drive relatively well, even without
paying much attention if we are experienced drivers at
least.
Right. Yeah. Yeah. It's such a familiar, you know,
experience that it's almost scary sometimes, you know, you're
driving and then you arrive home and you realize,
like, I can't remember any of what I just
did. Uh, YOUR mind was wandering elsewhere and, you
know, you just did all, but it wasn't, it
wasn't like you weren't making choices. I mean, and
responding even to the environment, you know, they had
their stoplights and their pedestrians and so your brain
is still processing all of that and responding to
it. It's just that your conscious mind wasn't really
attending to it. And so I think it's a
great example of, of choices we still make that
we still make freely even though they're not fully
conscious. And so if somebody, you know, is, is
on autopilot while they're driving and then they make
a mistake. Um, THAT'S still something that they've done,
still something they could be held accountable for. And
I do think that the, the neuroscience is suggesting
that more of our behavior is like this, then
we tend to think, but that, that's brings us
to the, so we have to do the science
there and figure out what is it really telling
us? Um, AND I think it's not telling us
that that everything's on autopilot. So some scientists do
believe that that kind of epiphenomenal is that it's
just never involved that our conscious choices, you know,
seem like they're involved, but they're really just kind
of floating along uh like the steam that comes
out of uh you know, a train engine, it's
not really actually causing the train to move, it's
just a by product. I don't think it's showing
us that. So it's showing us that well, our
conscious decisions don't play quite as much of a
role as we might have thought. But then we
can now get a switch in philosophy mode and
say, well, does that show that we don't have
free will? Uh DEPENDS on what we, we mean
by that, I suppose. And, and that itself is,
is controversial, but the basic idea of free will
and, and there have been studies on this suggesting
that this is a very ordinary conception is just
the ability to make choices among genuine options in
light of reasons, you know, to, to, to make
choices in, respond to the reasons that you, you've
got. And I think that that can happen even
when it's pretty automatic and unconscious. So if you're
on autopilot driving, you're not consciously aware of every
decision that that's being made. But you, your brain
is making choices responding to reasons. You know, if
the light is red, uh then you, you push
on the brake and you stop the car and
that is a choice, responding to reasons among different
kinds of options. You, you could have punched it
and blown through the light right, or not stopped
and that I think can be enough for free
will. Um As long as we've got, you know,
a complex that's unified in the right sorts of
ways that has a certain identity. It's not just
this disorganized kinds of urges and automatic thoughts. Uh
BUT much of our mental lives may be on
autopilot and yet still fit that basic definition of
free will that, that we can make, we can
respond to reasons uh in our environment. And that
is a pretty, it's not completely uncontroversial. Um BUT
it's a very popular view about what free will
means among Phil first, but apparently also the general
public, there have been, you know, psychology studies on
this asking people, you know, what are the factors
that are relevant to free will giving them hypothetical
different kinds of scenarios to see if they think
someone acted freely or not. And so there are
a lot of scientists who have a certain conception
of free will, they think, well, it has to
be conscious decision all the time that can like
defy the laws of nature and defy your own
brain chemistry. Certainly we don't have that power. Um
The neuroscience shows we don't, we don't have that,
uh we are, you know, uh physical creatures with,
with these electrochemical brains. And if we're going to
make choices, it has to work through that and
a lot of it's unconscious, but we don't necessarily
have to define free will that way. Uh A
lot of scientists do and I know he had
a Robert Souls on who's, who's got a recent
book like like this. And he, you know, he
thinks, well, this, this means we don't have free
will. Well, a certain conception of free will, I
suppose. But the analogy I like is with um
you know, witches versus solidity. So when we find
out that there's no magic or what have you,
we say, well, then that means there are no
witches because to, to be a witch is to
have certain magical powers. But then science revealed us
to us also that um solid objects are mostly
empty space. A bowling ball is mostly empty space.
And yet we don't say, ah, so there's no
such thing as solidity, we say, oh, well, solidity
is a little bit different than we thought it
was. And I think that we can and should
say the same thing about free will that we
often make this mistake of saying, well, we have
to always make conscious choices if it's going to
be free. But the more we learn about what
kinds of creatures and agents we are, we can
start saying, ok, well, maybe that's not really what
we are. We are these complex beings that are
full of conscious and unconscious choices that play a
role in our decision making.
So, in sort of a related topic in the
book, you also explore the issue of brain manipulation.
So before we get into specific cases of brain
brain manipulation, and you go through for example, ethical
questions associated with medicine. Uh WHAT is brain manipulation?
What counts as brain manipulation? Exactly?
Yeah. When we think brain manipulation, we think coercion,
you know, forcing someone to, to behave or think
a certain way. And uh I was thinking of
it more broadly as it could be even also
the uses of brain interventions to treat um medical
conditions. So there are all kinds of ways we
can manipulate our brains and they, they are classic
ones like drugs. Um Ssris or other antidepressants are
ways of manipulating our brains. And back in the
nineties, there are a lot of ethicists worried about
that. They thought, oh no. Now we're starting to
change our very personality and that could be kind
of ethically problematic, but we've become a lot more
comfortable with that so. Well. Ok. Sure. I'm taking
a pill that, that alters the serotonin in my
brain. But that's something that I can freely choose
to do and it may alter my personality a
bit. But, but that's something still that I've chosen
to do freely. Now, a lot of ethicists are
getting more concerned about even more direct brain manipulation.
Uh THINGS like brain stimulation, uh It could be
invasive or noninvasive or other kinds of drugs like
psychedelics. So there are a lot of uh there's
a lot of research now about psychedelics suggesting that
we could be used as a, as a form
of uh treatment for medical conditions, uh possibly also
a form of, of enhancement. But a lot of
people are concerned now that that might be an
unethical way of manipulating our brains. It certainly does
change the brain when you, when you have psychedelic
experiences. And there are all these kinds of ethical
questions that, that are raised when we start to
mess with um or manipulate the brain because it's
not really just like having an operation on your
arm or your leg. Uh Now we're talking about
what I like to think of as the seed
of the self. You know, this is where our
free will and our personality and our values is
is roughly housed in the brain and our nervous
system. And so it does raise this question of,
you know, are we uh impairing someone's autonomy by
manipulating their brain or just having a relevant brain
intervention? Um OR can we, can we freely choose
to change our own personality and identity? Uh OR
are we risking too much harm by manipulating the
brain? Especially when we don't really know a lot
about how it actually works just yet. Uh We're
still quite far from that actually, we're, we're still
learning a lot about how the brain works. And
there's, it's a big mystery how all this firing
of neurons gives rise to compliment uh complicated psychological
states, like emotions and decisions and all of that.
And so there might be a real concern about
whether, you know, neuroscience is ready for, you know,
the big stage of, of manipulating people's brains to
try to treat even very serious kinds of medical
conditions.
It's very important that you clarify that because I
mean, I would imagine that most people, when they
hear the term brain manipulation, they would think mostly
of surgery, perhaps deep brain stimulation. Some people also
think about that but not necessarily about uh drugs
in general, like for example, antidepressants or anxiety medication.
But here you are including anything that can have
any sort of uh biochemical electrochemical effect on the
brain as well. Right.
Yes. Yeah. And I think that's important because we
shouldn't be concerned about, you know, brain stimulation just
because it's a bit new and involves even more
direct manipulation of the brain. That doesn't seem to
be a morally relevant kind of distinction. There's still
all the same moral questions arise when we're talking
about things like uh psychedelics or antidepressants, which you
know, many, many more people are taking. You know,
there are a lot of patients who have been
doing things like deep brain stimulation for Parkinson's and
other neurological conditions. But there are many, many more
people who are taking drugs for mental disorders, things
like depression and so forth. So we need to,
I think raise the same kinds of questions there.
But of course, what's new and, and a little
bit more kind of the Wild West for ethics
is direct brain manipulation. And as you say, that
could be done through things like deep brain stimulation
where you have to actually have surgery. They, they
cut open the skull to implant very thin electrodes
deep in the brain to, to treat neurological conditions
like Parkinson's that involve degeneration of the neurons deep
in the brain. And, and that actually has been
quite successful for, for certain patients who have movement
disorders like Parkinson's or essential tremor, but it's being
expanded now to a lot of other conditions, psychiatric
conditions like treatment resistant depression, um anorexia, nervosa, uh
O CD. And so there are concerns I think
about, you know, are, are we using this uh
appropriately for all of these different ranges of conditions?
You know, is it safe? Is it really going
to benefit people. But those are the same kinds
of questions that we can ask about uh antidepressants.
And there have been big debates about whether antidepressants
are actually doing much for people and whether they're
very effective and whether they have risks that we
might not be so aware of. And uh it's
something that has affected me personally because I've taken
drugs before that have been on the market for
decades. And then we find out later that they,
you know, increase the risk of heart disease. Um
I, I get migraines and so I, I've had
a drug that got pulled for that. Ok. Well,
uh surprising because that drug was out for, for
decades and then we find out that it's causing
some harm. So I think we always have to
worry about that with any kind of medical intervention,
but especially with brain interventions, we have to figure
out uh is it really benefiting patients and how
much and then weigh that against the risks and
say, well, is it actually risking more harm than
good? So we always have to do that risk
benefit analysis. And when it comes to manipulating the
brain, we also have to factor in its potential
risks. Uh THINGS like changes to a person's identity
and personality. Um And those are, those are relevant
things to weigh into that calculation.
Uh You know, when earlier I mentioned surgery, I
was also thinking about probably even more invasive things
like lobotomies because you know, I am from Portugal
and Agus Muniz who got the Nobel Prize because
he was one of the pioneers of uh lobotomy
procedures. I mean, we know now that people who
got that kind of intervention back in the fifties,
sixties and so on due to epilepsy, for example,
to cure epilepsy, the epilepsy got cured, but then
they didn't uh end up in a very good
psychological state. They lost some important, I mean, the
decision uh important mechanisms related to decision making, emotion
processing and all of that. So I guess that
would be uh also a very good example of
brain manipulation in the extreme.
Right. Right. Yeah. And we look back at the
days of lobotomies as a kind of dark period
of, of neurology. But it's important as you say,
I mean, this was Nobel Prize winning work and
it did actually, you know, work in some cases.
The problem really was when you get humans who
are, who are fallible, uh taking control of this
kind of discovery and you have these sort of
overzealous um surgeons like um uh Walter Freeman who
who really just took it too far. And it
was the problem there was that kind of risk
benefit analysis. He was, you know, overs selling the
benefits and downplaying the risks and, and actually still
today, of course, we we use things not quite
um you know, frontal lobe lobotomies, but there are
effective treatments that involve removing portions of the brain.
Uh Michael J Fox, who, who has Parkinson's, you
know, one of the most famous people really who,
who is, who's had the disease. He had that
before deep brain stimulation was, was really uh widely
used. So he, he had portions of his brain
removed. I I read his um his memoir and
that's a normal technique that can be helpful. Same
for epilepsy. Uh One of the cases I discussed
in the book as a patient who has epilepsy.
And so he had portions of his temporal lobe
removed actually twice. And then it did have this
problem of causing him to have um some deviant
sexual desires. And he ultimately started downloading child pornography
and got caught by the, the FBI in the
United States. And so there are these questions about,
are we changing who, who people are by either
removing portions of the brain um giving them stimulators
that, that will, you know, continuously be stimulating parts
of the brain. It can only change who they
are but maybe cause them to, to even engage
in, in criminal behavior. So it's just a different
kind of risk benefit analysis that we're doing. And
I think we always have to be very careful,
uh especially when we're talking about an organ that
we don't really understand fundamentally um how it works.
So I, I don't know what you think about
this idea, but I guess that the most important
thing here to consider would be. So, first of
all, have the science uh right, because we need
to know really what works, what doesn't in what
cases and only what works should go on the
market and should be allowed for doctors to perform
uh in patient. Uh AND then uh informed consent
because the patients really do need to know what
are the risks, what are the benefits? Because there's
always risks associated with any kind of intervention. And
also, I mean, if the patient agrees with whatever
kind of uh proper intervention that there, that there's
out there, I mean, I guess we shouldn't consider
that a bad thing, even though in some cases
it might be very invasive or something like that.
Right. Right. And I think informed consent helps alleviate
a lot of these concerns. Um BUT it's not
perfect, you know, think about with, with Freeman and
lobotomies. Um YOU know, if you, if you oversell
the benefits and undersell the, the harms, then we're
going to have, you know, informed consent, but it,
it might not be tracking what the real risk
benefit analysis is. And I think that there is,
there's a danger of that always. And it's not
just with, with neuroscience and neurology, but throughout all
of science that we have to worry about over
selling the benefits and um under appreciating the harms.
And I've been quite influenced by philosopher science here,
uh Jacobs who has tried to you know, raise
the alarm bells here about some of this and
realize that we probably the structures of medicine and
partly through human fallibility and the financial incentives and
big pharma and so forth. We do have certain
structure that will tend towards over selling benefits and
under exploring harms. He's got this great phrase, the
Hollow Hunt for harms and medicine that we don't
actually look for the harms as well as we
should. And so we do have to get, I
think the science right? And yet we're working within
a structure that will tend to bias us towards
um, overs selling benefits and under appreciating harms. It
doesn't mean that, you know, we're, we're in a
terrible state, shouldn't trust, you know, medicine and all
that. But it just means that we have to
be very careful, especially when we're looking at potentially
really invasive and sometimes not reversible treatments that will
change a person's personality and identity have profound effects
on their lives. But, but as you suggest, we
also have to weigh that against, you know, potentially
serious benefits. A lot of these cases involve, you
know, people who have severe movement disorders that can
be so debilitating, they can't live independently. Uh, FOR
others, it involves things like major depression that's completely
resistant to other forms of treatment. And, you know,
we're talking about the potential loss of life, they
might actually take their own lives. Um These are
potentially great benefits if we can, you know, minimize
the number of people who are dying by suicide.
I can have major benefits for people who can
live more independently. And so I certainly understand um
the motivation and for both physicians, but also entrepreneurs
who are trying to develop different kinds of devices
and techniques to treat these very serious neurological conditions.
And I think that just it gets more difficult
as we are getting to the frontiers of this
research. And as we try to expand it to
cases that aren't necessarily so severe debilitating or treatment
resistant, I'll give you one recent example. Um THAT
actually just involves an oral drug. I don't know
if you heard about this, there's a drug for
a LS that got pulled from the market recently
called Reliv.
Where did that happen in the US
in the US? Yes, there's a company that developed
it in the US and it got pulled after
it wasn't really around for maybe a couple of
years, but it was tricky sort of thing is
again, you know, a LS is a very serious
debilitating neurological disorder and there's no real effective treatments
for it. And so the, the FDA, the Food
and Drug administration here, the regulators are trying to
figure out should we allow this, this drug even
though it didn't complete um the full phase three
human trials, but they said there was some early
promising results and they're trying to weigh that against,
but there's no real treatment for this very serious
neurological condition. So they allowed it to go forward.
But they said you do need to complete these
trials. And recently they, they finished out the trials
and they, they found evidence, you know, with much
larger samples, found evidence that there was no difference
between the drug and placebo. And so I think
that the company did the right thing which is
to pull the drug. And they said, ok, well,
we did the science and it looks like it's
not really working and yet it's a, it's a
very expensive drug. Um, IT'S about, I think it
was 100 and $58,000 a year that it would
cost, um, you know, per patient if they, if
they had to continuously take it every day, so
very expensive drug. Uh, WE don't want, you know,
people in the system to be paying for it
if it's not doing anything. Uh, AND it potentially
has, you know, side effects. And I think that
the company did the right thing as they said,
well, let's follow the science, but there are, of
course, so many incentives in, in medicine to go
the other direction. And just about a year ago,
this, this drug, um, Sudafed pe is what they
call it and, and United States, but basically AAA
new form of, uh, like a Sudafed decongestant that
you can't turn into meth, an illegal drug. So
there's great hope that we could have a different
alternative to something you can't turn into an illegal
drug. And they found out after a few decades
that it doesn't do anything, uh, that doesn't work
better than, than, than taking nothing. But that took,
you know, it took, I think it was about
1520 years. It's been on the market and it's
in, it's in everything everywhere, all kinds of cold
medication. So it doesn't always go that way. We
don't always discover early on that something is not
very effective um or that it's, it's quite harmful.
So I think we need to be better about
that and be especially cautious when we're talking about
manipulating the human brain.
Yeah. And unfortunately for you guys in the US
many, many times drugs, uh their price is also
over inflated in comparison to other countries. But, well,
I guess that's a discussion for another day. Um
00 and by the way, for the audience, I
also have an interview on the show with Doctor
J Jacob Stegen. So if people are interested, they
can go and look it up on the channel
or the website. So um moving on, uh let's
talk a little bit about mental disorders because there
are also different aspects to consider here. But first
of all, how do you think we should approach
the question? What is a mental disorder? Because this
is also highly debated and even also among scientists,
psychiatrists, clinical psychologists and so on So as a
philosopher, what would you say about it?
Yeah, I think it, it still is very controversial
and there's no exact consensus, I think among, as
you say, philosopher, psychiatrists. But the standard rough view,
I think that's pretty dominant, at least for the
diagnostic manuals is something like Jerome Wakefield's harmful dysfunction
view. The idea is that while mental disorder has
to involve um both harm to the individual patient
in some form, it's got to disrupt their, their
life, their work and so forth. And also should
involve some form of dysfunction in the mind or
the brain. And one way to see this is,
is with the, the tragic case of having homosexuality
included in these diagnostic manuals for so long in
the United States, it was pulled out only in
the seventies and it was partly on the basis
of this idea. They said, well, sure there can
be harm to people who, who are gay in,
say the United States where at the time uh
was, you know, marginalized and it was, you know,
used as a form of discrimination to, to say
that people had a mental disorder here. But, but
really, it's just because society is intolerant that, that
we're experiencing harm. Some people who, who would say,
well, yes, this is causing me problems. But um
it's mostly through society and it's not a dysfunction
in my mind or brain. So we always have
to navigate that and, and I think it's still
an evolving conversation about which things really do count
as a kind of dysfunction in the mind versus
just a mere difference or variation. And so I
think that's roughly a, a decent conception of, of
mental disorder, even if it's not entirely perfect. But
these days I'm, I'm happy with, with imperfect as
long as it's somewhat helpful.
And I guess that one of the things you
were alluding to there is the issue of stigma,
right? Because some of uh sometimes uh I mean,
in the case of homosexuality, that's very obvious, but
there are other cases where people, because they are
attached a particular label. And even, I mean, nowadays,
even with common conditions, sometimes people just because they
have a label of uh depression or because they
are bipolar or something like that, they are not
treated exactly the same way as normal people are
by other people. And so I, I mean, there's
an issue here that the label, I mean, in
terms of uh the medical system, the legal system
and so on is important and it can also
help the patient to know uh to have a
better understanding of what's going on in their head.
And perhaps that it's not their fault and so
on. But also it might be very stigmatizing to
have certain kinds of labels attached to oneself socially.
Right? Yes, I think it's a real dilemma that
we have here that you're pointing to where on
the one hand, we want to be able to
label mental disorders, to help people get treatment, to
have self understanding. That can be really important for
people to say, ok, this is what I have
and this is helping me understand my condition. And
yet at the same time, it's also potentially stigmatizing
to say that someone has a mental disorder. We
don't really always do that with physical disorders. There
are a lot of times people say, well, I'm
sick, I have the flu. Um OR maybe, you
know, I've just got a temporary physical illness or
even if it's chronic, you might say, well, if
someone has a physical disability and, and that can
be stigmatizing sometimes, but we've come become much more
comfortable. I think with realizing that we need to
be aware of that potential stigma. But it's harder
in the case of mental disorder because people, there
have been studies on this. People feel like if
somebody has a mental disorder, they are maybe um
less rational uh potentially more dangerous, partly because it
is a mental disorder. It's not just a physical
disorder and someone who has a physical disability, like
being in a wheelchair, it's not necessarily affecting their
mind. And so people aren't necessarily making judgments about
the likelihood of them being, you know, dangerous or
untrustworthy. So I think it really is a bind
that we're in. But I think there's, there's hope
that we can recognize that kind of stigma and
realize that we don't necessarily have to have it
while at the same time still categorizing at least
certain conditions as disorders. But some people will say
that we just need to, to pull things out
of the relevant diagnostic manuals. Um Like with, with
homosexuality, the response there was not, well, we'll keep
it in but try not to, to stigmatize it.
Uh We say no, it's just, it, it itself
is not a disorder. And so I think in
a lot of cases, we're trying to navigate that
um when it comes to things like like autism
and A DH D and dyslexia and even deafness.
So there's, there's an ongoing debate about the boundaries
of, of what counts as something that's still a
disorder, but we shouldn't stigmatize it versus something that
just shouldn't be considered a disorder at all. And
it's just part of this idea of, of neurodiversity.
Yeah. And related to neurodiversity. Uh This movement is
also associated with ideas. Uh AGAIN, uh with the
goal of destigmatize some of these things that are
still considered conditions, they might not be anymore one
day, I don't know. Uh uh BUT also to
uh raise awareness for the fact that there perhaps
are people out there who process information in different
ways who think differently. We have different worldviews that
are non normative and there's probably nothing particularly wrong
with that. And I mean, that is the case
for autism and even in more extreme cases. Like,
for example, I, I mean, I, I've read a
lot on these and I've, I've watched some documentaries
from, for example, the Netherlands Belgium where they have
medically assisted suicide. And I mean, if they don't
have any underlying medical condition, even a psychiatric condition
and if someone uh, declares under, uh, uh, I
mean, a particular set of conditions which I can't
really reproduce here because I don't, I don't have
them memorized, but, uh they have to follow a
particular protocol, uh if they express their wish to
no longer live because, I mean, life for them
is no longer meaningful or something like that. I
mean, they are allowed medically assisted suicide. And I
mean, I know that is a very, an extremely
sensitive topic but I also think that on the
other hand, perhaps is, uh, suicide should not be
considered exclusively a medical issue, but also a philosophical
and an existential issue. And I, and I guess
that people should also be allowed to not like
to live, I guess. I mean, that's just my
two cents on, on that. But,
yeah, yeah, it's a very difficult puzzle about trying
to respect people's autonomy and if they make the
choice that they want to end their lives, we
want to respect that. That's certainly the, the sentiment
I think in the Netherlands which has the most
permissive euthanasia laws, I think in the world and,
and yet we're trying to balance that against uh
unnecessary harm. And especially this issue about how some
of the harms that can arise and the struggles
that people have can arise from a society that
is not accommodating or stigmatizing their condition. Uh One
of the cases that came out of the Netherlands
and not that long ago, could have been 10
years ago now, uh was a, a man in
his forties who about my age who had struggled
with alcoholism for decades and it was just, there
was nothing he could do. He had been in
and out of uh rehabilitation centers multiple times and
he just couldn't kick the habit, couldn't get to
a place where he was happy with his life.
And so he, he did take advantage of um
the euthanasia abilities in, in the Netherlands and and
ended his life. These are very difficult cases partly
because, yeah, again, we want to respect the person's
decision. They're an adult um um competent to make
decisions about their own life. But also you might
worry that maybe there's not enough accommodation and treatment
and help for, for those kinds of conditions. So
yeah, bring it back to, to mental disorder. I
think it bumps up against all these very difficult
questions. We want to respect people's individual choices and
they may construe their own condition as a mere
difference and, and not a deficit. And we need
to keep in mind a lot of the insights
from the neurodiversity movement, which is that there is
a lot of stigma out there and a and
a lack of accommodations and they're trying to draw.
And I think quite rightly uh some movements from
disability rights activists who, who have tried to show
that, you know, you can actually live a very
good life with physical disability as long as there's
not so much stigma and failure to accommodate. And
so there's a similar, I think movement for mental
disorder and, and but there's, there's questions about, you
know, do we keep it as a disorder in
the diagnostic manuals but just be more accommodating and
not stigmatizing or do we remove it as we
did with the case of homosexuality? And I think
those conversations are still still ongoing for different kinds
of neurological types.
And what about the particular case of addiction? Because
that's also a highly debated topic in psychiatry and
also when it comes to particular kinds of proposals
that people have for particular kinds of addiction, like
for example, sometimes people talk about or propose video
game addiction, porn addiction and stuff like that. I
mean, new kinds of addictions. Uh How do you
approach that specific kind of disorder if it's a
disorder at all?
Yeah, I think addiction is a very interesting case
because it has the same sort of problem we're
trying to work on stigma and make sure that
we're not stigmatizing individuals with addiction, you know, for
a long time, addiction was just treated as a
moral failing. And there's been a move to, to
really medicalize it and say that this is no,
it's, it's a disorder and not just a disorder,
but even a disease of the brain. And clearly
the motivation there is to, to try to move
away from that moralization towards treatment and, and trying
to remove all the blame that we've, we've pushed
on addicts for so many decades and, and for
for potentially a much longer. So I think that's
a noble goal. But there's a real question about
whether we have enough relevant science to suggest that
it is a brain disease. And this is one
of my favorite topics I dug into in the
book, partly because I changed my mind on it,
which is a sort of miraculous for a philosopher.
But I went into it thinking, you know, this,
this seems like the dominant view, most clinicians, healthcare
professionals, neuroscientists, even potentially most philosophers do now think
that addiction is a brain disease. And the more
I dug, the more I thought, I'm not sure
that that any aspects of that view really hold
water. So there are three main components, as far
as I can tell, it's the idea that addiction
is a disease, but also that it's a disease
of the brain that that's where the relevant dysfunction
is. But also that part of that disease is
that it compromises um self control so that it
involves irresistible um compulsions that ultimately lead to relapse.
And there are all kinds of concerns about each
of those elements. If we just take um the,
the compulsion parts, there's a lot of real cases
of, of people with addictions, very serious addictions who
do exert a lot of control, they do deliberately
abstain from using for various reasons. Um There study
suggesting that people will actually take money instead of
a hit of their drug of choice and, and
that just doesn't make sense if it really is
an irresistible impulse, you know, if you have right
in front of you, the option to take this
drug that you're addicted to versus just, you know,
like $20 you would think that the brain disease
picture would say, well, well, of course, you're just
going to be compelled uh to, to, to choose
the drug, but, but many people will choose the
money. So there's a lot of evidence suggesting people
can exert control even if it's not perfect and
it often does fail. You might say, well, ok,
maybe addiction is not necessarily involving always a compulsion
that's irresistible, but maybe it's still a brain disease.
We do have a lot of evidence suggesting that
there are circuits in the brain that are impaired
or, or changed at least uh after people have
been taking drugs for a long time. But even
that too, it's not so clear that we should
think of that as due to at least ingestion
of the drug. The brain disease model really is
this idea that if, if you take the drug,
it somehow by taking the drug, it causes changes
in the brain that then lead to, you know,
compulsions, uh, to use the drug. And it's just
not so clear that that's really the primary source
of addiction. So there are a lot of people
who take drugs, addictive drug, very powerful addictive drugs
and don't become addicted. Um I was kind of
surprised to learn that it's only about 10 to
20% of people who even take um very serious
drugs like heroin or meth. Uh THE vast majority
don't get addicted. It's only about 10 to 20%
or do get addicted. And it also seems to
be that there's a lot of other factors distinct
from ingestion of the drug that contribute to addiction,
things like trauma, poverty, unemployment, uh co occurring mental
disorders like depression and anxiety. It's, it's really sad
actually, many people who end up using and becoming
addicted, it's partly to cope with things like depression
and anxiety. And so those are brain factors but
they're not due to ingestion of the drug. So
it's, it's not so clear that it's a brain
disease. I mean, there's something going on in the
brain, but it might be more a problem of
trauma isolation, unemployment, depression, anxiety, these are not due
to ingestion of any drugs. They're, they're sort of
background factors and they seem to be really important
factors when it comes to addiction. So then I
started thinking, well, ok, maybe it's not necessarily a
brain disease, not due to, to ingestion of the
drug that causes damage to the circuits in the
brain. Um, BUT maybe it's still appropriate to call
it a disease. And, you know, that's also controversial.
What do you, what do you count as a
disease versus, you know, maybe a mere disorder. But
we often think of diseases as involving a concrete
physiological mechanism that we understand as a kind of
uh dysfunction. And I don't think that we have
that we do have this picture of addiction as
largely involving the social and environmental factors and, and
other kinds of co occurring mental disorders that don't
necessarily have this clear underlying pathology. And so we
get left with this idea that well, maybe doesn't
make sense to call it the disorder. There are
a lot of just, just normal brain functions at
work in the background of, of things like trauma
and, and poverty and isolation. So it's not so
clear that we should call it a disease even
if that might seem helpful for stigma. And it's
not even so clear that it's helpful for stigma
uh as we were talking about before calling something
a disorder disease doesn't necessarily mean that we did
destigmatize it. Um Actually, it sometimes exacerbates it, we
think, oh no, this person has a disorder. Uh
MENTAL disorders it might be more dangerous or, or
less trustworthy. So it's not so clear that that's
actually helping us to, to destigmatize addiction in the
end.
And I guess that one of the main issues
here when it comes to whether addiction would be
a brain disease or not is uh reductionism, right?
I mean, reductionism in the epistemological sense, I guess
because I, I mean, there's this very common idea
nowadays and it's very prevalent in psychiatry as well
of trying to reduce every condition to something uh
biological, something happening in the brain. It could be
genes, it could be hormones, it could be neurotransmitters,
brain connections, something like that. But uh I mean,
it, we, I guess we should be wary of
even if there's some sort of psychological predisposition and
it's caused by partly by genes, partly by hormones,
partly by neurotransmitters or something like that. Um We
should be wary of trying to reduce all the
explanatory power to those factors, right? Because there are
other uh external environmental factors playing the role as
well.
Right. Right. Yeah. And I think there's a lot
of confusion about this, uh especially among non philosophers
because they, they might confuse uh these different issues
here and think that if you're saying there's not
a reduction of the psychological to the neurobiological, you
must be a dualist and you must think that
these, there's some sort of sort of separate spiritual
kind of world and, and these just aren't neurobiological
phenomena. But yeah, that is a different debate. And
really the the question here is just we could
assume that, you know, the mind just is a
physical thing that just is, is involves activity in
the brain. But there's really a question about whether
it's just brain circuits that are going to be
the relevant source of explanation uh rather than more
environmental factors. And of course, those are connected, I
mean, think about with addiction, one of the major
factors that you might think of as like environmental
is stress. So people who are in stressful environments,
um there's a famous study of Vietnam veterans who
were in the war and they used heroin at
much higher rates, but then stopped when they came
home. So they became less stressed there at back
home. And there too, you'd say, well that's environmental.
Sure. But of course, stress manifests in the brain,
there's brain activity that's associated with stress. So, so
of course, it all comes anything mental comes down
to something in the brain. But that's why I
like this distinction between, you know, is it something
in the brain caused by ingestion of the drugs
or is it caused by more environmental factors? And
I think that's a major source of confusion that
the debate is about whether it's a physical phenomenon
or something to do with the brain. Uh But
which aspect of the brain and which is doing
the most explanation for us should we explain it
in terms of uh neurobiological dysfunction or more environmental,
social things like unemployment and poverty and stressful conditions.
So I think that's a really important distinction and
it's one that, you know, psychiatry, as you say,
a lot of them think that it's obvious. But,
but it's an open question. I was just talking
to a psychiatrist the other day and we were
on this very issue. And so I asked him,
I said, so do you think like all the
disorders that are in these diagnostic manuals, do you
think they will ultimately have a very straightforward neurobiological
pathology like Alzheimer's or Parkinson's? And he said, yeah,
sure, sure. But I thought that's kind of weird
because it seems like an open question, an open
scientific question. It could be that it's not uh
one analogy here is with, um with race for
a long time. I think people assume that of
course race has some sort of biological reality. There
must be something, you know, deep in our genes
that differentiates the different races. But the consensus view
now based on a lot of scientific research is,
is that's not really right, that race is largely
a social construct. And so, you know, we could
have said, oh, it would be obvious, you know,
that it's going to turn out a certain way.
But I think similarly, it could turn out that
things like addiction, uh don't really primarily involve a
kind of underlying pathology in the brain and the
way that Alzheimer's and Parkinson's does. But I think
that there are certain cases, it might be, it
could be that schizophrenia turns out that way. Uh,
MAYBE not though, same thing with, with autism, maybe
if we don't, we consider it just a mere
difference or variation, not, not a disorder. Uh, I,
I worked in an autism lab for a couple
of years as part of my, my neuroscience training
and uh researcher there said, you know, I've been
looking for a biomarker for, for autism for decades
and, and they can't find one. AND a sort
of neurobiological change that they could indicate that somebody
has, has autism and it's just not there. So
it could turn out for any of these cases
that there's just not a clear discrete underlying kind
of brain difference or pathology. And I think we
just have to keep an open mind about which
cases will turn out one way versus the other.
And that matters a lot for, for fixing and
helping these. But so for addiction, which is a
major medical problem right now, especially with the opioid
crisis, it really matters how we treat it. So
if we think of it as largely just some
sort of underlying brain pathology, um that will focus
our efforts on neurobiological interventions. But if we think
that addiction is largely a social problem of unemployment,
poverty and stress and trauma, well then our relevant
interventions could be very different. Uh, WE might be
looking at more like, sort of economic changes and
policy changes.
Yes. And I guess that the biggest issue here
is perhaps not so much that many people out
there, particularly psychiatrists believe that uh everything is reducible
to biology or neurobiology. But the fact that they
think that that's for sure, the case, I mean,
as a scientist using words, like it's obvious it's
for sure like this, it is certainly this way.
I mean, I guess that's no longer doing science,
right? Because this might sound a bit pedantic, but
uh science is ever evolving. And uh at least
uh when you first get into an issue, you
shouldn't go into it with particular kinds of assumptions
in one way or the other. And in this
particular case, assuming, assuming that for sure, all medical
or all mental conditions would be reducible to biological
factors, uh raises many uh alarms. Right.
Yes, I mean, I, I, I've become myself more
realistic about, about science and how it works partly
by doing it myself with collaborators and, and working
with scientists. I think that we often have this,
well, this background assumption that the science has to
be completely objective and that we, we shouldn't bring
in any background assumptions. I think really in the
end, that's just sort of psychologically impossible that we
are humans, we, you know, science is done by
humans and we of course, are going to bring
all of our baggage to the table, our assumptions,
our biases. And I think we have to just
sort of live with that and accept it, but
there are better or worse ways of doing that.
And I think we do need to, I think
as the general public especially, uh be more realistic
about how science works and realize that, you know,
this does involve certain kinds of assumptions and the
addiction cases. It's very evident um where a lot
of this brain disease model comes from, uh the
the relevant kinds of agencies that do a lot
of the funding for this work. At least in
the United States, the National Institute for drug abuse
has been very influential in, in developing and doing
research on and supporting the brain disease model of
addiction. And so it's kind of no surprise that,
you know, the whole institution structures are all pushing
a certain framework that that's going to be the
dominant framework. And I think that it sort of
makes sense that that's what we're working with now.
But there are, I think deep concerns about whether
we're being sufficiently critical about it. Uh So I
think it's great to always have an open mind
when it comes to science. But I think it's
also almost more important as the general public and
scientists ourselves to just realize that, that we're fallible
and we can't, we can't do that. I mean,
a lot of philosophers of science have have come
to this point. They say we should give up
the value free ideal in science. It's just not
possible. And, and I'm totally on board with that.
I think once we look at human psychology and,
and do the neuroscience realize this, this is just
how the human brain works that we can't get
away from our own uh biases, our own assumptions
and our own motivations for wanting to seek out
certain answers rather than others.
And by the way with that in mind and
referring again to how certain conditions or were considered
conditions in the past, like homosexuality and they are
no longer considered as such nowadays. Uh We, we
also have to keep in mind that science and
psychiatry specifically operates within a particular socio context and
also um responds to the kinds of uh moral
norms that operate in the societies where they, I
mean, where the med uh where the medical and
the scientific knowledge is produced.
Right. Right. Yeah. And, and there are these forces
that are there that are not necessarily forces for,
for truth. There is, there is a lot of
money involved in medicine and it's not just in,
in big pharma, people often think about pills as
being the relevant concern here. But it's for any
any medical intervention, there's, there's going to be some
kind of financial factors at play. And I think
a lot of the public, you know, uh as
they say, in the South. Uh uh BLESS their
heart think that, uh you know, well, this is
what happens in industry and, and when you have
a lot of like, scientists are funded by the
government that, of course, there's no biases and everything
is ok, but it's not just, I think financial
incentives that, that play a role in how we
do science, it's all kinds of just ordinary human
kinds of motivations. Uh We're still working within a
social structure and we still have these kinds of,
as you say, socio cultural assumptions, but it's not
even just our, our moral views, like about what
is deviant versus what's not. It's also just that
there are a lot of motivations like, um I,
I've worked in, in labs and, you know, there's
a lot of motivation to say, make sure that
your graduate students or your postdocs get jobs. And
so that's going to influence maybe how you spin
some of your research. Like we need to get
this published in a good journal so that my,
and that's a perfectly morally laudable motivation. Um But
it might not be a motivation that's necessarily tied
to the truth. Um There are conflicts there, right?
Sometimes, you know, being completely truthful and, and uh
honest about your, your work and its limitations will
mean that you'll have costs to whether you can
help the people who depend on you in your
lab. And so there are all kinds of human
motivations like that. Um ALSO just sort of social
standing and credit, you know, scientists are human beings.
And so they're influenced by what their peers think
of them and they, they want to not necessarily
make a lot of money. Actually, a lot of
people want to do things like win Nobel prizes
or get status within that profession. And that sometimes
is at odds with, with the truth, sometimes the
truth is not necessarily going to be as interesting.
And so it's not that scientists are frauds and
you know, they're trying to cut corners deliberately. But
again, it comes back to full circle to, to
how a lot of our choices are influenced by
unconscious forces and even scientists can be unconsciously influenced
by a lot of these factors to maybe inadvertently
cut corners and, and not necessarily doing the best
science or, or I was watching out for the
limitations. So I think we have to just take
that all on board, be open about it and
say we've got our biases. Let's just try to
read them out, let's try to understand them, but
we'll probably never get rid of them entirely.
So, shifting gears a little bit. Now, I would
like to ask you about a particular topic within
the realm of morality that you explore in the
book. Uh TELL us about moral enhancement. So what
is that? And what does it have to do
with neuroscience?
Hm. Yes, I mean, moral enhancement. Would just mean
improving yourself morally. And the contrast there is with
treatment. So there's a, a distinction between treatment versus
enhancement and much of medicine is just all about
treating problems, disorders, uh dysfunction disease. But then if
we go beyond normal, we're in the realm of,
of enhancement. And that's something that we, we want
to have in morality because we are not morally
perfect beings. There's always room for improvement uh individually
and as a society and, and we see that,
you know, with things like uh having a better
understanding about, about homosexuality and about diversity, we see
a lot of this improvement happening, but there's always
more to be done. So I think it's, it's
laudable for us to say how can we be
better? And we usually do that not through neuroscience
or manipulating our brains, at least not directly. But
as we were saying before, of course, everything, every
mental phenomenon comes down to something in the brain.
So if you're going to be a morally better
person, have better beliefs and better motivations and better
character traits, it's going to involve changes in the
brain. So when we educate Children about morality or
when they read books or, or watch movies and
learn something about morality, then there's a change in
their brain. Um But that's kind of indirect. That's,
that's traditional kinds of enhancement. We try to make
sure that people are being taught good lessons and
we, we learn in in various modalities just by
watching other people. But also we could potentially more
directly manipulate our brains to enhance ourselves. There's been
a lot of interest lately about things like using
brain stimulation, potentially psychedelics or, or other drugs to
directly manipulate our brains in order to enhance ourselves
morally. And that is a question and ethic partly
because it, it might be that, you know, we
shouldn't be doing this, we shouldn't be trying to
directly manipulate our brains partly because it might not
be safe or we might be kind of manipulating
ourselves in a way that seems like we're constraining
our freedom or uh maybe not being very authentic.
And so we have some of those same kinds
of questions about brain interventions that, but now applied
to uh enhancement that maybe we shouldn't be embarking
on that kind of dystopian, you know, project of
trying to perfect ourselves through, you know, taking drugs
and, and, you know, getting do it yourself, brain
stimulators and all of that. So there's been a
lot of concerns among ethicists about that. And for
me, I, I'm, I'm less concerned, I think that
it can be done. Well, there are concerns about
enhancement. We don't want, you know, the government mandating
that, you know, we lace the water with Oxytocin
so that everyone becomes a little bit more compassionate
or something that's certainly going to constrain freedom. And,
you know, that's, that's very concerning. So I've been
trying to think myself about what is a possible
route of directly manipulating our brains to make ourselves
better people that we could, we could still respect
and say that this is, this is something that's
not concerning. And I think it depends on, on
the intervention so it could be their ways of
doing this is very unsafe. I mean, you can,
I don't want to recommend anyone to do this,
but you can, you can buy various, you know,
components online and, and get a little do it
yourself. Brain stimulator, it's probably not gonna be very
effective, it's not invasive. It's just things that you
can put on the outside of, of your head
and it will just give some surface level stimulation,
things like um transcranial direct current stimulation, probably not
going to be very effective and also may not
be very harmful for that reason because it's not
so invasive. But the thing I think is especially
interesting is is psychedelics because those can have very
profound effects on people. And yet there's a big
concern about, about safety and, and psychedelics might be
one of those interventions that does have a direct
effect on morality. A lot of people who do
have psychedelic experiences report that they have this kind
of uh ego dissolution where they feel more at
one with other people and the universe. And so
they become less self centered, more compassionate, more open
minded. These are all, you know, great traits as
far as we can tell from morality perspective, so
it might be that that could be a source
of, of moral enhancement. And yet there are maybe
some reasonable concerns about whether it's safe and whether
it's something that is, is really a kind of
future that we want to embark on.
Uh, I mean, whenever I hear the word enhancement,
uh I get at least a little bit worried
because some of that sounds like uh I mean,
of course, the connection I'm making here is not
immediately obvious, but it sounds like eugenics, at least
to a certain extent in the sense that you're
making a claim that there are morally superior and
morally inferior people, or at least I would imagine
that some people would make that claim and then
moral enhancement would be a way of morally improving
the people who are morally inferior or that would
produce, for example, morally inferior, um offspring, some something
like that. So, I, I mean, does that, does
this make any sense or not? Is this something
that probably we should worry about?
Yeah, I think that is a serious concern. We
want to make sure that we are not imposing
a narrow conception of what it means to be
a good person. So I think to avoid that
we would have to think of this as, as
very individualized that we wouldn't want to say that
the, the state or even the scientific community or
anyone is, is saying, here's the way to be
a better person and we should all enhance, you
know, to this particular goal. But I do think
that we could allow a more pluralistic approach where
we say, well, look, everyone kind of already engages
in various forms of self improvement, right? We read
books, self help books. Uh We listen to podcasts.
We, we study the stoics and meditation and, and
those sorts of things to try to make ourselves
better. And that's just indirect manipulation of our brains.
We're trying to, you know, change our beliefs and
values and character traits. Indirectly, I think we could
do something similar with, with direct manipulation of our
brains. So we just allow everyone to explore on
their own, have their own sort of personal moral
journey of enhancement and they might use various kinds
of direct forms of stimulation to, to do that.
But I hesitate to, to say it to, to
as if it's a recommendation. But I do think
that one possible story that this could turn into
is if some people maybe using um having psychedelic
experiences, at least, you know, if it's legal in
their location, uh which is changing rapidly, at least
across the United States, then they might use that
as a way of, of exploring their own moral
values and potentially enhancing themselves. And, and it's really
not science. I mean, a lot of people do
this already in the psychedelic community. They, they see
it as not treatment for a therapy, even though
that's what a lot of the research is about
now, but as a way of enhancing themselves morally
and to, to get to a more enlightened kind
of position in their life. And so I think
that is a potential source of moral enhancement, but
have to be done safely. It would have to
be done legally and it would have to be
done with caution, with, with understanding that sometimes engaging
these experiences could lead to moral regression. It could
lead someone down to a path where they actually
have a worse moral character traits. But it does
look like it's, it's a possibility for many people
that it could improve it. Uh INSOFAR as it
makes them less self centered. Uh For example, so
that that's one possibility, I don't know if there
are others, you know, a lot of the brain
stimulation I don't think is gonna have very precise
and profound effects on morality specifically. Um But there
could be certain kinds of experiences uh enhanced with,
with certain kinds of drugs that could potentially lead
people down a personal journey. Uh So that we're
not saying there's one view, you know, this is
the eugenic view of everyone should be moving down
this path. It could be, there would be lots
of disagreements. Somebody could say I'm, I'm trying to
have certain experiences um maybe doing a long meditation
retreat uh with some uh psilocybin as an aid
that allows them to, you know, become less self
centered. Uh So they can be, you know, maybe
more compassionate towards other humans. Maybe another person might
be doing it to explore their attitudes towards nonhuman
animals to increase their compassion there. And so it
might be very different views about how we're going
to explore it, but it could be individual and,
and pluralistic so that we don't have one single
conception of what the, the right person is, which
was the real, the real downfall of, of eugenics
and the problem there.
Mhm. No, I really appreciate that sort of more
pluralistic and individualistic approach to it because, I mean,
I, I guess that even from just an ethics
standpoint and even more specifically a meta ethics standpoint,
another thing that could probably be an issue here,
uh, is, uh, whether moral realism or moral anti
realism is. Right. Correct. Because, I mean, I was
just thinking that, for example, uh, what would moral
enhancement really mean in this particular case? I mean,
would it be, for example, someone developing psychological traits
that would allow them to better follow whatever particular
kinds of moral norms prevail in their specific society?
Would it be a supposed set of universal moral
values that people would deem to be the best
ones out there? Because I, I mean, there's also
this debate between the moral realists and the anti
realists, right? And I would imagine that it would
also, uh, play a role here. Right.
Yeah. These, these are some really thorny questions. Uh,
MOSTLY I've tried to conveniently avoid but I think
you're right that it's, that it seems relevant and
I'll try to give you one reason for thinking.
Maybe we don't have to settle those deep questions
and meta ethics in order to, to pursue the
project of moral enhancement. So, here's one way to
think about it, uh, uh, standard kind of simple
moral realist view would be something like utilitarianism. So
you might think there's, there's one true morality and
it comes down to which actions are going to
produce the best consequences or maybe make the most
people happy. Standard way of interpreting that as is
a realist view. There are these, you know, objective
facts of the matter and ethics and they just
come down to what's gonna make most people happy.
You now, even on that view, there's still going
to be lots of variation and pluralism. So I,
I myself, I'm not a, a devout utilitarian, but
I think that many of them who, who are
utilitarians would say that would say this, they'd say,
well, ok, she wanna make people happy. But what
makes people happy in India versus, you know, the
United States or Portugal is going to be very
different, just just as a matter of empirical fact,
you know, there's just different social norms, there's different
experiences and backgrounds. So certain things that make people
happy in the United States might not make people
happy in other kinds of countries or other subcultures.
And so even there, you're going to have a
lot of pluralism, even if you think there's still
one objective fact about ethics, which is that we
should make the most people happy. So I think
even there, it could justify a kind of pluralism.
So you won't say that we're trying to, you
know, see the one way that everyone ought, ought
to be, but we're just trying to figure out
how to make the most people happy. And that
might involve uh quite a bit of variation across
cultures and, and subcultures.
So I would like to ask you now about
neuro marketing. So, uh could you tell uh particularly
for the audience what it is uh and whether
it works or not and also then we can
discuss whether it's ethical or not.
Hm. Yeah. So, so neuromarketing would just be using
the tools of neuroscience to try to read the
minds of consumers to try to understand what their
preferences are and really how, how to, to sell
them products better. And that has been done there.
There are some groups like one of the largest
marketing firms in the United States is Nielsen and
they did have a kind of neuromarketing division for
a long time, but reportedly they've closed it in
the past few years, partly because it seemed like
it wasn't really delivering on the investment. So there
are, I think open questions about whether we have
the tools to be able to really understand people's
preferences by looking at their brain activity. Now, I
mean that it really is a deep puzzle because
you can do focus groups and all of that.
But that doesn't necessarily mean that, you know, people
are reliable reporting what their preferences are. You know,
this again goes back to the stuff on free
will and unconsciousness. So we don't always know exactly
why we want the things we do. Uh My
favorite example here is the ipad. I remember when
the ipad came out, I like many people thought
this is a ridiculous product. Why do I need
something slightly bigger than the phone and slightly smaller
than the laptop? And a lot of people thought
this is not, you know, uh this is like
the downfall of apple and yet it completely took
off and I have one now. Uh AND I
didn't realize that I actually would like it. There's
this device that I really needed I didn't realize.
So there's a real puzzle about whether you can
get past what people say about their own preferences
and just look directly at their brain activity to
figure out, you know, what do they really want.
And I don't know that we have the ability
to, to get there. It's a real, as I
said, a puzzle about how the neural activity in
the brain gives rise to very particular kinds of
thoughts and preferences, but it's rapidly advancing. So in
the book, I'm, I'm very skeptical and say, you
know, we're a long way from really understanding particularly
the preferences. Uh But, you know, the book came
out right around the time that Chat G BT
got released. So that was kind of like already
in press and ready to go. And then we
had this major advancement in artificial intelligence and, and
that's being applied now to, to brain reading and
it's had some really remarkable results. So I don't
know if you saw, but um so there was
something recently maybe last year, a group who had
a patient with a LS who can't speak anymore.
And they used uh machine learning and the same
kinds of like, you know, neuro network technology to
decode her brain activity and convert it into speech.
So she can't, you know, ver verbally articulate speech
anymore. But just by thinking about saying certain sentences,
they could decode it using machine learning and then
produce, produce speech in a computer that's really impressive.
Um Also just about a month ago, uh Elon
Musk's Neuralink Company released a video of their first
human who has their brain implant. And with this
implant, uh they are able to uh play chess
just by thinking. So this is a patient who
also uh you know, can't, can't move, I think
uh below his neck, I think he may have
a spinal cord injury so he can't really control
a lot except with, with his, his mouth. And
now through having a neuralink implant, he can control
a chessboard. So things are advancing very rapidly. Um
Yeah, I think there are some, still some serious
limitations and one thing is I like to do
when it comes to neuroscience in the marketplace is
compare it to what we already have out there.
And what we already have out there is all
these companies who have massive amounts of big data
on our purchases, on our social networks, on who
we're friends with. Um OUR location data with our
smartphones. And all of that information is extremely valuable
for decoding what people's preferences are, what they're more
likely to buy or not. And, and uh for
figuring out how to, how to sell things to
people based just on that non neurobiological data, that's
just purchasing behavior, location and social networks that is
has been immensely powerful for companies. I don't know
that this neuroscience technology is ever going to be
cost effective enough to supersede that. I think that
we could live in a world one day where
as neuralink hopes, you have a lot of people
who are just ordinary consumers, they don't have a
spinal cord injury, they don't have a LS, they're
just ordinary consumers who get a brain implant like
they would, you know, wear an apple watch that
uh provides feedback on their heart rate and they
could use that to, you know, maybe decode some
of their thoughts to get neural feedback on their
emotional states. Now, that's a lot of brain data.
Uh THAT of course, would just be like your
location on your phone. It would just be like
your purchases and your social networks and these companies
would have access to all of that data. So
there are deep questions about privacy if we move
into that world. But I think there are also
real questions about whether people will actually do that.
I don't know that people are going to get
brain implants uh just like they would a smartwatch,
but uh it may not ever be actually as
effective as all the other kinds of data that
we allow companies to have already
a and when it comes to the marketing, uh
bit of it, uh I mean, it also uh
I think raises particular kinds of ethical questions because
I mean, at least to some extent, I would
imagine that the ethicists can question not just neuromarketing
specifically, but marketing in general because at least to
some extent it's plausible to say and accurate to
say that uh it's a little bit manipulating, right?
I mean, uh uh I mean, you're not really
telling the entire truth when you're doing marketing to
sell product services and all of that. So, I
mean, it isn't it, at least to some extent
a little bit deceiving and if so, isn't that
also something that in the particular context of neuromarketing
we should, uh, care about.
Right. Yeah, I think it's the very same general
problem we have with marketing that it might be
manipulative in ways that might to, to, again go
back to, to free will sort of bypass our
own, our own free choice. But given that I
have this view that the unconscious forces in our
minds are still part of who we are, still
part of our free agency. Uh I think that
some of those concerns are, are not as serious
as they might seem at first blush, especially if
we can exert control over those influences. So it's
true that we have a lot of influences, especially
nowadays, you know, we've got this, this attention economy
where everything on our smartphone and the watches are
all trying to pull our attention uh towards different
features of our, our environment. And I think that
does have an effect on our agency and, and
our, and our freedom and we need to be
alert to that and, but there are ways I
think of exercising our agency in light of, of
that new environment. So this is part of the,
the view I'm hoping that overall the book can
give is, is the complexity of our agency as
involving these unconscious and conscious forces, but we can
harness that in certain ways. Um I'll give you
one example. So there are various kinds of reward
programs that, that people have for different businesses or
credit cards. If you have a certain credit card,
then you'll get certain rewards. And you know, that's
something that can influence you unconsciously if you have
a I, that's the whole point of these rewards
programs, right? So you've got an Amazon credit card.
The whole point is that, you know, you'll buy
more products on Amazon because you get Amazon points,
right? For doing that. So that's a kind of
automatic and potentially unconscious influence on your choices. But
we can take some control and change the environment
we're in, you could not get that credit card
or you could get a different one that is
for a company that you maybe would rather be
spending more money at. Uh So I think you
can make those kinds of choices about the environment
you're in. Um YOU can do a digital detox
and you know, uh delete some of your, your
the worst apps that you've got. Uh THERE are
choices that we can make. So I think a
lot of times we can play the victim and
say, well, look, there are all these companies who
are manipulating us. Um But also I think we
need to take some individual agency and say, but
we're also kind of letting them and it's up
to us to make a choice about whether we,
we let them get into our, our personal lives
that much in influence. You have a choice. You
can, you can go into your, you know, your
Google account and, and have them delete your data,
you know, after a month of, of storing it
or they can keep it forever. That that's a
choice that we have as consumers. And I think
uh what it calls for us to do is
is exert more of our own agency and control
over what's influencing us automatically and unconsciously and that
at least can alleviate some of the moral concerns
that people have about this.
So let me ask you then one final question
that is also sort of related to neuromarketing and
some of the other issues you raise there like
free will agency and all of that. Um I
mean, there's this issue of neuro hype, I mean,
people hyping up certain kinds of, for example, new
technologies, I don't know if you hear, for example,
Elon Musk saying that through neuralink, somewhere in the
near future, you will be able to have access
to the internet via your brain directly or even
download information into your brain, something like that. Or
if you hear people claiming that if you make
your kids, your three year old listen to baby
Einstein, then he's like you will go up by
20 points or something like that. I mean, there,
there's a lot of high surrounding products related to
uh neuronal applications, neuroscience, the brain and so on.
So, uh how do you think we could have
a of more nuanced and balanced approach to neuro
science and to the ethical side of it.
Right. Yeah, it's hard because there, there are a
lot of exciting developments and as I say, we
can be doubtful. But then in a couple of
years, you have this, you know, major leaps in
artificial intelligence systems. So it's hard to make predictions,
I think for decades, people say, well, you know,
we're going to have the new A I revolution
and never came. And then I think in the
past couple of years, people have realized, OK, maybe,
maybe it's finally come where we've made a serious
leap in the capabilities of these technologies. And so
I, I tend to, to think we should not
overhype. It's a kind of a big theme of
the book is that there's a lot of excessive
uh enthusiasm about some of these neurotechnology and we
need to really look at their limitations and by
looking at the limitations, we can also see that
maybe some of the ethical concerns aren't as powerful.
But I do think we need to be open
minded about the, the possibility that we, we could
develop technology that uh have all of these, these
promised outcomes. But there are going to be built
in limitations. A lot of times there's this assumption
that every bit of technology just gets better and
cheaper. We've seen that with, with smartphones. Uh IT'S
just been radical in just my lifetime. You know
how now we have what effectively would be considered
a supercomputer in my pocket. Um When you just
a couple of decades ago, we didn't have the
internet at all. So it's, it's possible, I suppose,
but there are built in limitations. So a lot
of this decoding that's being done like with, with
neuralink where they have these, I mean, first of
all, you have to get a implant directly onto,
you know, the cortex. Uh AND, and these are
only electrode arrays that go into the cortex of
the brain, which doesn't reach every part of the
brain, right? There are a lot of structure in
the brain involved with, you know, motivation and desire
that would be much deeper in the brain. Uh
So you have to have surgery, you know, effectively
to, to even get this kind of real powerful
kind of implant that can get really good signal
out of all the noise of the brain activity.
So that by itself, I think is, is a
major limitation for, for widespread uh consumer applications. But,
you know, maybe that's something people will be comfortable
with, but there's also there's got to be effectively,
you know, these incredibly powerful computers and algorithms that,
that have to be attached to the decoding. So
whether that's something that, you know, could actually be
very portable that people will want to, to have
on constantly is a real open question. And I
think that there's a lot of fears attached to
that, but we don't necessarily have to worry if
it's not ever going to be a reality. And
there may be people who say that they're fed
up with al already, how much of our privacy
has been, you know, given over to companies. And
they might say this is the line. You know,
I've, I've got my smart watch, I've got my,
my phone that tracks my location but you could
see widespread, a lot of consumers saying I'm not
going to, to the brain, you know, we're, we're
not, I'm not going to give that up to
companies and throw it up in the cloud. And,
and I think that could be a very wise
decision on the part of a lot of consumers
and, and it could be, could be a reality.
So I think there's a real choice point for,
for us as humans right now, we could draw
that line in the sand and say that we
want to have a certain level of privacy here.
Uh And that it could actually be quite powerful
and we may just reject that uh that new
frontier, at least when it goes beyond treatment for
serious kinds of neurological conditions. But I think it
remains to be seen whether we're going to actually,
you know, uh hear the hype come to reality.
But in general, I think we need to, to
be a bit more cautious and say, what are
the realistic limitations and, and not be too overenthusiastic
and correspondingly overly alarmist about the, the moral concerns
here. I think there's a tendency in neuro ethics
to, to think far into the potential future with
a lot of science fiction scenarios and to worry
about that and maybe it's just my own dispositions
and personality type. But, but I'm, I'm a bit
allergic to that and I like to think about
the real questions we've got pressing us right now,
um, about things like brain interventions, addiction and neuro
diversity that we have to address now. Um RATHER
than, you know, very, you know, speculative claims about
a potential future. We do need to be ahead
of the science and technology and think about the
ethical issues. Um But I think there's a lot
of focus and attention going to things that might
not ever come to full fruition.
So the book is again, Neuroethics Agency in the
Age of Brain Science. I'm leaving a link to
it in the description of the interview when Dr
May, would you like to tell people apart from
the book where they can find you and your
work on the internet?
Sure. I mean, maybe with all my, my concerns
and qualms about uh privacy and all I might
realize I'm not, I'm not that active on social
media. Uh BUT I do have a website uh
Josh D a.com and I have all kinds of
information about the book among other things up there.
And I really do hope that the, the book
could be accessible to people who are outside of
philosophy, but also outside of academic research. It's, it's
meant to, to be as maybe overly ambitious that's
trying to reach, you know, a wide audience, but
also be a contribution to the academic literature. So
I push my own view, it's very opinionated. Uh
BUT it's also meant to, to give a introduction
to this field, which I think is a really
important field and it is going to continue to,
to shape the future of, of ethics in the
way we think about ourselves. So I've got all
kinds of information up there. I've got summaries of
chapters, even the case studies that I, I talk
about in the book. I've got summaries of those
and I continue to try to post my research
on there. I'm still working on things and neuroethics
and neurodiversity. Um But I'm also doing other projects
um like uh on how do we make more
progress on on factory farming? That's, that's one of
my, my next big projects with actually a guest
you had on, I think in the past Victor
Kumar. So he's a collaborator of mine on this
topic and seeing how he and I are thinking
a lot about that. How do we understand uh
the the ethical problem of factory farming and how
can we make progress on it by looking at
human psychology?
Great. So look, I really love the book and
I hope that people from my audience really run
and buy it. It's a very interesting read and
also it connects to other interviews with other people
I did on the show, which we mentioned throughout
our conversation. So thank you so much for coming
on the show. It was really fun to talk
with you.
Yeah, thanks so much. I really enjoyed the conversation.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitting
B no Wolf, Tim Hall, Erica J, Connors Philip
Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert Wine in Nai
Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Herz
J and Lain Jung Y and the K Hes
Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel s friends, David Sloan
Wilson Yasa dear, Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani
Charlotte Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt Pavlo Stassi, Nale
me, Gary G Alman, Samo, Zal Ari and Ye
Polton John Barboza, Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner
Douglas Fry Franka Gilon Cortez Solis Scott. Zachary. Ftw
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgino, Luke Loki, Georgio
Theophano Chris Williams and Peter Wo David Williams Di
A Costa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Fist, Larry Dey junior, Old
Einon Starry Michael Bailey then Spur by Robert Grassy
Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radis Mark Kemple
Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin
Gilbert Jessica. No, Linda Brendan Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley
Man George Katis, Valentine Steinman, Perros, Kate Von Goler,
Alexander Albert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular
J Ner Urla. Good enough Gregory Hastings David Pins
of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net. A
special thanks to my producers is our web, Jim
Frank Luca Stina, Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes
Dixon, Benedikt Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
John Carl Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And
to my executive producers Matthew Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan
Knit and Rosie. Thank you for all